\_sh v3.0  439  L&C Note
\_DateStampHasFourDigitYear

\r above
\co heaven or sky 
\wrd "neen yingy na"  
\co It is the same word as used in the Supyire NT draft.  It actually literally
translates "the area above".  It is a way to express heaven. When asking
multiple UNS, "What is in the sky (area above)?"  The answer was given "
sky.  The sun, the stars, the moon, the clouds."
\co The place where God lives - When probing others to see what is commonly
understood to be God's place of residence, one UNS stated, "God is
everywhere.  He is here with us.  If I go to town, He is there.  God is
everywhere.  Why?  Because he created the entire world and he knows it. 
He is everywhere.  He lives here, He lives above.  He is everywhere.  God
doesn't sleep in any one place - He is God.  This entire place is His.  People
here think God lives above. It is possible for God to live above, because He
is everywhere"
\co When quizzing another, he stated, "God lives above."  Another person
stated, "God lives above, but people here think God is in everything."
\co When asking the national Bible translation team what is the general view of
the NonChristian population, they stated, "People think God lives above."
\co While many believe this is the place one will go after death, a more
traditional Supyire belief is that after death, one will go to a "village of the
dead", where the older, more celebrated and powerful one in this life, would
have more power as an intermediary being in this village of the dead.  In
this village, one resides as a spirit being but can intercede in this world.  In
the more traditional funerals, small model cooking utensils or anything used
in everyday life, may be buried with the body to ensure that they will have
these things in the afterlife village.
\co Also, while many Supyire believe "above" is where God is, not all have this
belief and not all would automatically associate "Jesus going above" to
"Jesus is with God."  Therefore, this warranted amplification in story line
50.21b.
\co Uses within story set: See story 01.03, 28.05 28.15, 50:21, 52:02, 52:04,
54:07 56:02 60:28 60:30
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r accept
\wrd nyee  
\co Accept , agree. It literally means to agree, or agree with, or agree that.  It
can mean to be in one accord with another person or with something said or
done.  Or, it can mean to accept to do something that may have been
proposed.  “E.g." Do you agree with what was said?” “He agreed (accepted) to
do something for me.”   
\co It is the same as the word used in the Supyire NT.  (Acts 16:14, example). 
This is a different word than the word for "trust, or faith"; however, the
words are closely linked.  It was explained if one agrees with what is said,
they then “believe” in the words and have “confidence” in them.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r alliance
\wrd tunmbyee  
\co means promise, oath or agreement.  can also be used as a vow in which a
promise is made that if something is not done, God will take your life.  An
alliance is an oath / covenant between two parties . This is the same word
that has been used in the draft of the Supyire Genesis and NT.  (Gen 9:11 ,
13, 15 ; It is like a covenant - a signed agreement between two parties.  It
is stronger than just a promise like, "I will come here every week." .. That
statement is not an "alliance" ... but an example of an "alliance" would be
that of a signed agreement ... a loan of money, signed with a signature to
repay and work it off.  The origional use was as a blood covenant: two
people can make a blood covenant (and thus become members of the same
kin group) by making a cut in each other’s wrist, then holding the cuts
together with a kola nut between, then splitting the kola nut in half and each
eating a half; they and their descendants are then members of the same
patrilineal kinship group. At the time of taking the oath, intermarriage may
be excepted from the interdictions which normally are in force within a
patrilineal group
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r angels
\wrd meleke ni  
\co People understand these as spirit beings, some beleive that everyone has
one or two of these as a personal guiding spirit.  These are not visible. 
They are usually benevelent, good, and protecting, but they can also be
thought to punish you.  This is the term for angel as used in the Supyire NT,
it is always prefaced with the word "God" or "God's angels" to make sure
they are understood as good spirits.  Angels are also known and understood
in Supyire culture as God's messengers.  They do the good work for God
and deliever His words to those whom they are meant for.
\co In testing, we asked a UNS what he thought of angels.  He stated, "Each
person has two of these.  One on the right side, one on the left.  One of
these beings is good and tells you to do good things. The other is bad and
tells you to do bad things.  These beings cannot be seen.  They are from
God, but the bad one is not doing God's work."  Another UNS stated, "These
are doing the work of God.  They are with God.  You can't normally see
them, but when God wills that you see them, you can.  You can't touch
them."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r ask
\wrd  
\co see "pray" In context, can mean told a command, told what to do or simply
"ask" or "beg".
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r astonished
\wrd Kakyanhala  
\co Is the term in the Supyire NT that means surprised or astonished. ie "it
surprised me."  "the way she crossed the river astonished all the villagers." 
This word is used to express a state of awe in responce to a extraordinary
thing.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r backs
\wrd láhá wà na.  
\co "Turn your backs to"  
\co To turn your back to someone or something is to turn away from it.  To
refuse it.  To not work with it, for it, or toward it any longer.  This term is
used in everyday life among the Supyire and in our story set to show that
people have separated / stopped/ or ceased in their relationship with
another.  In our story set it is used to show that the people have turned
their backs on God and are now following another but is also used as a
command, to turn your backs to their fetishes.  As described by BK in
back-translating the Isaiah, 22, story, “this phrase means that they were
refusing God, turning away from God and doing their own will.”

22.01b and 60.25

\co
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r baptize
\wrd batize  
\co This is the same word used in the Supyire NT draft.  It is a borrowed word
from French.  This word has been unpacked in the story set to be as
explained as “to mean to be immersed in water and come out again to show
that you want to change your way of living” and “to show that one has
changed their behavior and left their old ways that are not right.”  This word
is first unpacked in the Baptism of Jesus and John the Baptist story.  The
Senufo culture has many “ceremonial type washings”,  associated both with
the Muslim culture and with the animistic ATR culture.  Therefore to use
“ceremonial washing” or “symbolic washing” would bring with it much baggage.
We were witness to an annual sacrifice to one of the big fetishes in our
villages in which everyone washed in the creek after to receive the blessing
of the fetish.  There is also certain water that is used with certain animistic
practices to protect people from snake bite or from the dangers of working
the field.  Based on the baggage associated with the phrase “ceremonial
washing” or “washing with water”, we have chosen to use the same word as in
the Supyire NT and unpack it for understanding.  This word is not commonly
understood outside of places with Christian influence unless unpacked.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r believers
\wrd Dánafeebii  
\co  Believer,   This is the same term used in the Supyire NT.   It comes from
the word used for trust, confidence, or belief – dana.  One example of how
these words are being used:  “The believer has placed his confidence in
God.”  This sentence has the word “believer” and the verb form of the word “to
believe” as “to have confidence” in it.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r bless 
\wrd Jwó le  
\co To ask for blessings The requests made by the elders at the village
sacrifices can be summarised as follows: they were seeking wives, good
rains, millet, increase in population, the ability to be generous hosts, and a
good reputation for the village. Most of these could be grouped around the
theme of fertility: fertile families and fertile earth are earnestly sought after
among the Supyire and will result in honour for the family or village.

To ask for protection against perceived dangers The requests for protection
are the natural counterpart of those for blessings: protection from hunger,
from birds eating the millet in the fields, from lightning, from the death of
infants, from those jealous of the village who would seek to harm it.

Blessing      Occasion “May God sweep the road before you.”  departure on a
voyage “May God make his mother’s milk sweet to him.” news of birth “May
God give you a lot back in its place.”  the receipt of a gift “May God open the
morning.”   good night greeting

Kile or God is the source of all blessings, throughout the day, people will
wish each other good fortune, health and protection invoking the name of
Kile. There is a vast variety of blessings which include: “May God give you
strength.”  “May God make the rest of the day pass well.”  “May God wake us
up one at a time” (a night greeting: only in an emergency would everyone
wake up at the same time).
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r Christ
\wrd Shwofoo?i woo mpyia sirra lay  
\co "Savior we are waiting for"
\co The keyterms "Christ" and "Messiah" are not easily recognized and
understood in the Supyire language.  While the Supyire NT draft uses forms
of the French word for "Jesus Christ" and uses the phrase "God's Chosen
One" for Messiah, often.  These terms were not easily reproduced upon
testing and for the ease of retelling and simplicity of not introducing more
new names for Jesus, a term used throughout the story set and one that is
easy to reproduce, is used here. Savior.  To separate this from simply any
one who saves someone from something, the phrase, "Savior we are
waiting for" has been used.  This phrase is retold with ease as the Supyire
words within the phrase are common.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r country
\wrd kini  
\co country or nation, this word is different from the word used for "kingdom".
It is a term the Supyire use in everyday speech.  For example, "America's
country is where you come from." or "Seven countries border Mali."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r create
\wrd yaa  
\co Create, This word means to “create, make, fashion.”  “Creer” in French.  It can
be used in construction purposes as in the sentence, “The town was very well
built.”, or “Make the bricks to construct the house.”  It can also be used to
mean repair, as in “My shade covering fell down, but he repaired it.”  It can
also have more of a meaning of not simply creating something, but
fashioning it into something.  “The rocks were fashioned in a way that they
looked like a crocodile.” “She is very beautiful” meaning she is well made.  It
can be used to express bringing something into existence that is not in
existence or to fashion and improve something that already exists or was
broken.   Examples of this use in the Supyire draft of Genesis: Gen 6:14 –
“Make for yourself an ark”.  Gen 1:6 – “God made the expanse and separated
the water”; Gen 1:16 “He made the stars”.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r curse
\wrd Lá?á   
\co Curse This word in Supyire is used to mean “curse” and is used in the Supyire
draft of Genesis, as in Gen 3:14 “ So the LORD God said to the serpent,
“Because you have done this, ’Cursed are you above all the livestock and all
the wild animals!’”   Words have great power to the Supyire.  It is believed
that once spoken, they take on a life of their own to bring about what was
spoken.  A Supyire will often make a sacrifice to ward off an evil curse
directed towards him.  The curse may be connected to an action, such as
leaving the head of a snake wrapped up as if it were a corpse ready for
burial, or in the form of a can of ash in the road or path that someone
frequently travels.  It is used in the Supyire language to cast ill desires upon
someone else. If someone wishes something bad to happen to someone
else, they can “curse” them.  However, it is explained that a curse may only
be effective when a parent is cursing a child.  It is said that, “When your wife
comes with a child (i.e. when she comes to marry you she brings a child she
has had by another man), you can’'t curse it.”  In effect, a person is
considered “cursed” if they have been cursed by their parents.

Some sacrifices are performed to fetishes or to ancestors to ward off evil
curses.  We heard the following story:  A Supyire farmer was sick.  His
daughter was living away and did not return home to be with her sick
father.  He cursed her by saying, “If I die before she comes back, may she
suffer all her life.”  He died and his daughter did not even attend the funeral. 
So, when his daughter had trouble conceiving children, it was accredited to
her father’s curse.  A sacrifice was performed asking her pardon from the
ancestors.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r demons
\wrd jínani  
\co Demons, These are spirit beings.  Can be any of numerous spirit beings that
the Supyire believe exist.  They live in streams or the bush.  They interact
with humans.  The Supyire say that the work of the jinas is at night time. 
The Supyire often make sacrifices to the jinas and believe that jinas can do
good or bad.  These beings are often cited as being the cause of good or
bad rain, good or bad harvest, the death of a child, or accidents that may
occur.  The Supyire believe that jinas can select certain people to be their
instruments and then enter them to give them special powers – whether that
is to play a musical instrument at religious fetes or perform acts of
divination.  The jinas are seen as owners of the earth.  The ancestors of the
village made an agreement with them that in return for being allowed to
settle on the land, the villagers make sacrifices to the jinas.  Often it seems
the Supyire live in fear of the jinas.  If sacrifices are not made to them,
they can become angry and do evil against you.  In our village, it is spoken
that these beings are the cause of the deep-well water pump breaking
several years ago.  Within our family, there are several who have been
possessed or “had jinas enter their body” from time to time.  One of whom is
known to play the musical instrument while planting or harvesting crops. 
One day, she was carried home from the field on a motorcycle.  She was
not herself as she was flailing about and screaming.  I was told, “The jinas
have entered her.”  This was obviously not a good thing for her physically as
she was suffering. However, it was explained to me that these spirits would
eventually leave her.  And they did.  Leaving her body tired and exhausted,
but eventually returning to herself.  This is the word used for demons in the
Supyire NT as in the demon-possessed man story of Mark 5 and in Acts 16
for the spirit inside the slave-girl.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r disciples
\wrd Yesu cyelentiibii  
\co This word is the term used in the Supyire NT for disciples.  Used for the
student, follower, helper or apprentice of Jesus.  A disciple is also someone
who if you are not there can take your place, like an apprentice.  The
translation team has decided, through out the NT, to use Yesu cyelentiibii, or
"Jesus' disciples" to show without a doubt who they are following and
learning from.  As we were in language study we were sometimes referred
to as our "teacher's students".
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r earth
\wrd nì?ke  
\co earth, dirt, soil.  This is the term used everyday in talking about the soil/
dirt when planting.  It is a very common term also used in the Supyire Gen
& NT drafts, for example in Gen 1:2.
\co
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r enemy
\wrd Zàmpe  
\co This is the term used in the Supyire drafts of Genesis and the NT.  The term
means the people or persons who do not like you, people who work against
you, or possibily do things to harm you.  Several examples of this: "One
must admit the virtues of ones enemies." and "When you are in trouble you
know where your enemies are."   We have heard this word used in
everyday conversation to describe people who do work against you, or
even within the context of war in a neighboring country to the south of Mali.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r extraordinary 
\co extraordinary thing ; strange happening
\wrd Kakyanhala  
\co This is the same word use in the Supyire NT for miracle, extraordinary
occurance, astonishing happening.  Examples of how this is used in
conversations, "It was a surprise to me to hear it."  "I saw astonishing
things above coming down on me."  "His cows multiplied astonishingly."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r fetish
\wrd kacyiin  
\co This word in Supyire is used to mean a fetish, idol, or personal god. 
Fetishes are man-made objects but are believed to have supernatural
power.  Oftentimes, these objects are hung in a bag in the entrance meeting
place of the family.  Or, they could be housed in its own little hut.  There are
a few “big” fetishes that are widespread among the Supyire and may be
found in many of the Supyire villages.  Each of these main fetishes are
known for having certain distinct power.  The Supyire people offer sacrifices
to these. These sacrifices can be in the form of food (rice, cola nuts, milk)
or could be in the form of an animal’s sacrificed blood.  Some fetishes have
an annual sacrifice allotted to them in which the villagers go, make sacrifice
to the fetish, “greet” the fetish, and seek its blessings.  There are differences
in the “importance” given to fetishes as some fetishes are more highly
respected and feared than others. Some of the “big” fetishes have houses in
which they stay.   As the Supyire people view God as a distant God who can
not be reached through personal interaction, these fetishes are often seen
as intermediaries between them and God.  The power of the fetish is greatly
feared, for the owner can use it not only to seek his own good, but also to
harm others.  Usually once a year, there is a celebration in honor of the
fetish and to help maintain good relations with it. Someone will wear a mask
and a particular outfit to personify the fetish and dance. The fetish mask will
also come out to dance at the funeral of its owner. It is often forbidden for
women to see the fetish or its mask.  One night, during our first few months
in the village, we were woken up by our language helper who hastily told us
that “one thing was promenading through the village” and that no matter
what, we were not allowed to come out and look at it.  We realized later that
it indeed was one of these fetishes personified in which if a woman saw it, it
would kill her.  After the death of an elderly man in our village, we were
witness to one of the fetishes running through the village.  Again, we were
told not to look at it.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r forever
\wrd Shi fo teekwombaa  
\co "Life forever" 
\co This term is used in our story set to communicate eternal life or life
forever.  Literally translates "living in time without end" or "life forever". 
Both terms in Supyire for life & forever are clearly understood and used
commonly in the Supyire language.
\co Uses as exact phrase in story set:   30.05 I would give you some water,
water that will give life forever. 38.15 I will give life forever to my sheep.
\co The Supyire NT uses a form of this phrase in John 3:16 & 3:36.  As well as
in Acts 13:48.  Romans 5:21 & 6:23.
\co This same word for forever is used in other phrases to express you will live
or stay "forever" above with God.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r forgive
\wrd yàfa  
\co This word means "to forgive" or "to be pardonned".   Ex:  "Ningaa, forgive
me, I forgive you."  "He took her bag of corn, but she forgave him."
\co Uses in Supyire draft:  Luke 3:03, Luke 5:20 , Luke 6:37 , Luke 11:4 , Luke
23:24, etc.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r garden
\wrd chee ckworray  
\co This is the same word used in the NT Supyire draft, includes an area/garden
with trees.  In testing, when asked what is in a "chee ckworray", there
response was that it is a farm of trees.  Like the word "plantation" or
"jardin" in French.  They commented that this is a good place because there
is a lot to eat there.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r God
\wrd Kile  
\co Is the term used in the Supyire NT for "God".  The word kile has three
meanings: First, the Creator God is Kile. Second, the sky is called kile.  And
third, if you find anything considered extraordinary in nature,  such as a
skin shed by a python,  or the nest of a rare bird (called kileükuu, God’s
chicken) or two chameleons mating,  you can take them home, and they
become a kile. They are considered as a manifestation of God, and have
supernatural powers. This little kile can receive sacrifices like a fetish, but it
is more the god of an individual or a family,  and as such has less influence
on the community as a whole. Kile is the Creator God, the source of all life.
It is Kile that is in control of all that happens, good and bad, and is
perceived  more as a force rather than a person.  God is the source of all
blessings, throughout the day, people will wish each other good fortune,
health and protection invoking the name of Kile. Examples: “May God give
you strength.”  “May God make the rest of the day pass well.”  “May God wake
us up one at a time” (a night greeting: only in an emergency would everyone
wake up at the same time). Nevertheless, Kile is seen as remote and
inaccessible to people. The following are current Supyire expressions that
show this:  “Kile laaga a t››n.”   God is far away.  “W… na j… a n› Kile na mî.” Nobody
can reach God.  “W… na Kile cŠ mî.”  Nobody knows God. As Kile cannot be
reached directly, people need to find intermediaries who do have access to
him.   To have access to God,  one normally has to go through the channel
of intermediaries who are closer to him than humans are: spirits who live in
the bush, or ancestors who live in the village of the dead.
\co The story set consistently uses the term "God", and only "God" where both
"Lord" and "Lord God" have been used throughout Scripture.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r house
\co " God's praying house"
\wrd Kilenaarebage  
\co This is the word used in the Supyire NT draft for “temple”.  It literally
translates as “God’s praying house”.  The word for “pray” is also used to mean
“ask” or “beg” in the Supyire language.  Please see the key term “pray” for
further explanation.  In testing sessions, this is identified as a building  or
physical place where people go to pray to God.  This is seen as different
from the concept of "“church"” including a sense of “a group of believers”. It is
understood as a building where Christians, Muslims, or those from another
religion go to pray.
\co
\co In the Supyire NT, the term used throughout, for what the NIV translates as
Temple, is “God’s Prayer House.”  This term is used in Matthew 4:5, 12:05,
21:23, 26:61.  Mark 11:11, 13:11.  Luke 2:37, 19:45, 21:37.  John 2;14,
8:2, 10:22.  Where the NIV talked about the feast of dedication the Supyire
NT says the “feast for God’s Praying House.”  God’s prayer house is also used
in Acts  2:46, 5:42.
\co The term the Supyire NT uses for Synagogue translates to “God’s word’s
schoolhouse.”  This term is used for Synagogue in Matthew 4:23, 9:35,
23:06.  Acts 9:20, 13:5, 15:21, 24:12 among other places where
Synagogue is used in the NIV.
\co The term used in the Supyire NT for church is typically "group of believers". 
The NIV uses Church for the body of believers in these following examples: 
Matthew 16:18, 18:17 and Acts 4:32.  In these cases, the Supyire NT  uses
“group of believers.”  In 1 Corinthians: 14:4, 14:12 it also uses “group of
believers.”  But 1 Corinthians 15:9 uses “group of God’s believers.”
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r king
\wrd saan  
\co This term is different than chief.  It is the king of a kingdom or country,
autocrat, or ruler.  This term is used in the Supyire Gen & NT drafts.  We
have discovered this term seems to be dated in that it is not used in modern
culture, but this word has been compared to the President of a country. 
Long ago the Senufo Supyire kings who settled the area are talked of being
great power men who were known for being hunters, holding many wives &
children, and owning a great deal of property from land to livestock.  The
nearby city still holds the name of one of these kings.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r leaders
\co "leaders of God's Praying House"
\wrd Kilenaarebage nurhfabee  
\co This is a generic term that includes the Pharisees, Sadducees, Scribes, and
Priests.  It is not the same term used as any of the above four in the
Supyire NT.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r love
\wrd caa  
\co  This Supyire word means love or like or want depending on context.  You
can say that you “love/like” someone or that you “like” something.  Or if you
put an object with the word it can mean that you “want’ that object.   I
love/like him/her.  They have loved each other since childhood. I like/want
it. I don’t want the fruit, but I do want the sauce things.   It seems this word
is most commonly associated with objects rather than people.
\wrd kyaa táan 
\co This word is the word used in the Supyire NT for love.  It expresses that
something is good or sweet for someone else and therefore they
like/appreciate/love it.  The word “taan” is the Supyire word for good.  The
combined expressioned translates “It’s good” or “it’s good for you” which is used
to express love for it or for a person.  It is used in the NT translation to
express “love your enemies”, “love your neighbors”, “God is love”,  “love others
as God loves you”.  It is also used in the Supyire language in the following
examples, “She likes/loves it/him.  We all like money.  Today’'s trip to the
bush was good for you (i.e.  You liked today’'s trip to the bush.)
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r Master
\wrd Chillentoongi  
\co Master, Teacher.  This is a Supyire word commonly used to express a
teacher, or master or someone that students or disciples are learning from. 
This word is used consistently throughout the story set to reference Jesus as
"Teacher" or "Master".  This is not the same word for Lord that is used in the
Supyire NT.  The word used for "Lord" only seems to be used in reference
to Jesus Christ, or Lord God, and is not used in everyday conversations in
reference to a chief or master.  Therefore, in the Story 42, The Triumphal
Entry Story, when Jesus refers to himself as "Lord", we have used the word
above which generically means "teacher, or master".  This is the same root
word for "disciples", or "people who are learning".

\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r messenger
\wrd tùnntun?   
\co This term is understood in Supyire to be someone who is a messenger, or
who is sent out to perform an errand. "E.g. “"They sent a messenger to call
him”" or "“The village man said ‘Send a messenger out for him’”.  For example,
if someone in the village passed away, a messenger would be sent from
within that family to travel to all surrounding villages to inform them of the
news.  Other examples, if someone younger is asked to do something by an
elder, they are then sent out to perform that action as a “messenger” or
“commissioned one”.  This word comes form the word “tùnnturo” which means
errand or message.   This is the word the Supyire NT draft uses to mean
“Prophet” or “Spokesman”.  The word “God” or “Kile” is added in front to represent
God’'s Prophet or God'’s Spokesman so as not to be confused with the
everyday term for someone who is sent out or commissioned to perform a
task. Therefore, throughout the story set, Biblical Prophets are called kile
tùnntun?? to match the Supyire draft.  In Luke 1:17, it states “"And he will go
on before the Lord, in the spirit and power of Elijah"”; here in the Supyire NT
draft, Elijah is referred to not only by name, but as “God’s Messenger Elijah”. 
Also in Luke 1:70 as it refers to “holy prophets of old”, this is translated as
“God’s Messengers” in the Supyire NT.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r moment
\co "At the moment"
\wrd tindee or lu tinney  
\co This is the usual way to express "when" or "at that time".  It doesn't
necessarily mean the action is immediate.    It can be linked to other actions
as time indicators, "After the 'moment' that such and such action took place,
they did another action."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r name
\wrd mege  
\co In Supyire, this literally means "name".  Ex:  Her "name" is ____.  They
placed this "name" on her.  A week or more after a child is born, they say
they are going to place the name on it.  Used in other phrases can mean
"reputation" - "He ruined her reputation" (broken her name).  It can also be
used to mean "for the sake of".  Ex:  I gave this offering to God, for the
sake of the children's health.
\co   
\co in God's name
\wrd Kile mege na
\co This phrase literally translates "in God's name".  It is used to express doing
something or coming in "God's name" or "with God's authority".  It is used
in the Supyire NT for such phrases.  (Luke 19:38 , Luke 21:12 - "for my
name's sake", John 5:43 - I have come in "My Father's name". The english
word "glory" is expressed in Supyire as "to make one's name big".  In
Supyire NT, glory is expressed as "making God's name big".  (John 11:4)
\co This phrase is also used to express, "in the name of Jesus", or with the
power from Jesus, or authority of Jesus.  (Acts 3:6 ; Acts 16:18)

\co blasphemy
\wrd Kile mege kege    
\co This word, name, can be used in conjunction with "break" to express
"blasphemy".  In John 10:37, blasphemy is expressed as "to break God's
name".

\co
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r noticed
\wrd nya  
\co This word has several senses in the Supyire language.  It can mean literally
“to see”, as in "“Have you seen her today” or “Did you see that truck?"”  It can
also mean “to realize” or “to understand”, as in "“I accept/understand that you
are over me" (my supervisor).” Or “"I realize that the world is full of many
different people".”  It can also be used based on context to mean something
that has been done or experienced before, as in "“I have been to Ivory
Coast before"”.  If used in context with “to see oneself” it can also mean to be
ashamed.   This is used in the Supyire draft of Genesis in context with Gen
1:4,  and other similar references (Gen 6:5), “God saw the light was good.” 
The use of this in the Supyire scripture translation is an indication that it
does not seem to imply that God was unaware of these things before he saw
/ noticed / realized.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r peace
\wrd yyeninke  
\co The literal translation of the Supyire aa is used in the Gen & NT draft
translates as having a "cool face".  To not be hot, over working, stressed
over life and circumistances.  A lack of disturbing, a removal of things
bothersome; an example given is if we were studying language and kids
came to bother us, we may ask them to "leave us in peace".  But can also
mean: carefreeness, freedom from anxiety, and well-being.   The Supyire
believe peace to be a time when your family is healthy, there is plenty of
food for all to eat, there is no one working against you, and your name is
good (people are speaking well of you).  These are the prayer requests of
many, the God would give them peace.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r power
\wrd fanhe  
\co "sin pewhy fanhe Kile" , means "God with power"  "fanhe" can mean power,
strength, or force.  This is the term used in the Supyire drafts.  You may
bless someone with, "may God give you strength."  or "This man got power
and grew old in his power, no one could take this power from him until he
died." Fetishes are man-made objects endued with supernatural power
which families will often hang in a bag in the vestibule, entrance hut to their
compound. God has supernatural powers over things that life and regular
circumstances cannot.  The Senufo appear to be profoundly religious and
superstitious, showing fear of invisible forces with occult powers, which they
have to deal with day in day out. That explains the multitude of sacrifices,
offerings, and consultations with the diviners for power.  In the Supyire
culture where words spoken can be particularly powerful and potentially
dangerous, blessings to curses.  Supyire people have mixed feelings
towards the supernatural. They see the need to harness the power available
there, but also have a fear of coming too close to beings who are not always
favourably disposed towards them. Another thing the Supyire do is called
“"Giving oneself".  That” would be the Supyire way of expressing dedication of
oneself to someone more powerful, tribute. The idea of giving oneself to a
deity is familiar to the Supyire -- To gain more power through this
connection.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r praise
\co praise or worship 
\wrd peene  
\co From the Supyire NT draft to mean "to respect", or "to worship", or "to
praise" or honor God.  Some examples from our everyday life here would
be:  "They do not honor each other."  "He deserved praise."  "They did not
respect us."  Honor and respecting a person, especailly one who is older
than you, you is very important in the Supyire life.  The word the NT draft
uses and the word used commonly here are to show this to those who are
deserving.  From my understanding the word for praise / worship is used
very much the same in Supyire as with the meaning it holds in English.  For
example an elder on his deathbed telling his children to worship the trees. 
But can also be seen as make religious offerings or to a religious cult or to
worship the village in a way that pleases the village guardian spirits.
\wrd sun
\co to make offerings, praise, or worship a fetish.  For example, "We will make
offerings to the jinn tomorrow."  "We will make an offering to the jinn
against him"
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r pray
\wrd naare  
\co This is word is used to mean “ask”, “beg”, and/or “pray”.  It can be used to say
"“The child is begging for food."”  Or “"They came to beg the authorities."”  In
this case, the word “beg” takes on additional meaning of showing mercy.  Or
to say “"The child is asking the old man for advice."”  It can also be used in
application to sacrifices made to fetishes, “They pray to the jinas that they
will give rain.” Sacrifices made in Supyire culture are based on reciprocity. 
A life force, or the shedding of blood, is offered to the fetish in return for an
answer to prayer.  It seems the emphasis of Supyire prayer is on the gift or
thing that they want to receive.     
\co It is the word for “pray” used in the Supyire NT; however it is always stated
to what the people are praying to.  Luke 3:21, “as Jesus was praying,” It is
stated, “While Jesus was praying to God…” in the Supyire NT.  Again in Luke
22:40, the Supyire NT reads, “and prayed to God.”
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r Promise
\wrd nwomee  
\co to make a promise, declaration or oath.  to take the words and keep them,
obey them, follow through with that you say.  
\co A Supyire proverb is "Before you give your word to your neighbor, give him
your hand." "He does what he promises, (lit. He goes in his promises
footsteps.)"   The owner of a promise is called, "nwomee ninkin" he is the
sole person and doesn't contradict himself.  This is also the term used in the
Supyire Gen & NT drafts. (Heb. 11:9 - referring to the land promised to
them ; Heb 11:11 - God keeps his promises ; Luke 1:45 - believing the
promise God spoke to her ; Luke 1:73; Acts 1:4 - wait for what the Lord had
promised ; Gen 21:1 - The Lord did to Sarah as he had promised)
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r relationship
\wrd "woo nyar .. shwoo" (the good relations between us), or "shwohoni"
(betweens)  
\co A relationship between people, or between people and God.  This translates
as "relations between ..." or the second word "shwohoni" literally translates
to "the betweens".  For the Supyire, relationships are very important.  In
Supyire culture, aspects that define relationship include fellowship, eating
together, spending time with one another, speaking to one another, walking
with one another - as you walk a friend home.  Someone would extend
mercy, love, favor, and grace to someone in which there is an established
and healthy relationship with.  However, if the relationship is closed or
broken, there would be little or no communication and no time spent
together.  Relationships between people and family members are to be kept
harmonious.  Relationships between people and fetishes or jinas are
important.  One would not want the relationship between a jin or fetish to be
broken for fear the power the jinas has to harm. Relationship between man
and God is not seen as being directly possible without going through another
spirit-being as intermediary. We were told jokingly once that since we did
not bring back a gift from our travels to give to our friend, our relationship
was now broken.  This was said in jest; however, oftentimes things are not
said or information not made available publicly for fear of breaking a
relationship.  Relationships often times take precidence and priority over an
individual's desire or will.  Often times, in the Supyire culture sacrifices are
performed to fetishes in hopes of mainting relationships or restoring them: 
either relationships with the jinas themselves, with ancestral spirits, or
between existing family members.
\co This term is used in the NT draft.  It does translate as "communion" and
"good relationship" as told to us by SIL translators here.  For example, it is
used in John 15: 4,6,7...for the concept of "abiding in Christ" and states in
the Supyire NT draft, "staying in good relationship".  Again, in John 16:33,
this word for "good relationship" is used in place of the phrase "in me you
will have peace ..." to state "In a good relationship between you and me,
you will have peace." It is used again in Acts 2:42 to describe the
"fellowship" between believers.  Also, in Romans 5:11, which states in the
NET "11 Not only this, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom we have now received this reconciliation,"  the
Supyire NT draft uses the word relationship here and states, "We rejoice in
God, because of our good relationship with our Lord Jesus, He has united us
with God."  Again in Romans 6:23, NET states, "23  For the payoff of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord."  The
Supyire text uses the word for "good relationship" here to express God
gives life to us because of our 'good relationship' with our Lord Jesus Christ,
life forever."  Again in Romans 8:1, the word is used to express being "in
Christ Jesus" ... having "good relationship" with Jesus.  These are a few
samples of the use of the word for "good relationship" that is being used
throughout our story set and is consistent with the usage in the NT for
"abiding in Christ", being "in Christ", "fellowship" with others and between
people and the Lord Jesus Christ.
\co The concept of restored relationship is expressed as a once broken/cut
relationship that is put back together.  The word here "sogo" for "put back
together" is used in the Supyire NT:  Luke 22:51 - puts his ear back
together, Acts 20:11 - "conversation" here is expressed as "putting words
together".
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r rise
\wrd ne  
\co To "wake up".  Example "They woke up and went out to the bush."  This is
the phrase used to express waking up, and rising in the morning.
\co Usage:  In Supyire NT, this phrase is used to express Jesus "rising" from
death.  It is used in Luke 18:33.  "Three days after death, I will rise."   Luke
24:7.
\co It can also be expressed that "Jesus left death".  "ne a fworo kwù?i."  As in
Luke 24:23 expresses that they said Jesus was alive, in Supyire NT, it is
stated, they said Jesus "has risen to leave death."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r road
\wrd kùní  
\co Everyday uses of the term range from asking for permission to leave a
village or even a meeting or group who have gathered.  It is used as the
term for the path that is traveled, gravel, dirt, or the paved roads that lead
to the cities.  The term “Road” is used in Supyire culture and throughout our
story set to also refer to who and how one person would follow or practice
something - whether following a "way of life", following a "religion" (the
Christian road, God's road, the Muslim road) or following a leader's road
(Jesus' road, Mohammed's road).  To be on another's road means to
following another through the actions in their lives, the words they speak
honoring the one they chose to follow, in their obedience to that one they
are following.  It is an expression used often in Supyire to mean that you
are doing someone's will. For example, if you are on God's road, you are
following a path that God would want you to follow - doing God's work,
respecting God.  Many Supyire believe there are many roads to get to God,
there is the road of the Fetish, the Muslim Road, and God'’s / Jesus’ Road.
\co The concept of repentance is expressed within the story set as leaving your
old road and taking God/ Jesus’ road.  The concept of leaving a road/ letting
a road/ changing your road, be it your person path that you are living,
following the Muslim road, or the Fetish road is a concept that is also used in
Supyire culture.  While the Supyire NT uses the phrase "changing your ways
of behavior" to express repentance, this phrase was not retold well in
testing, while the concept of leaving/taking roads was retold and originated
on its own through testing responses.

Road is used in the following stories to show how or who people are
following. 04.09, 22.02, 22.11, 22.12, 28.04, 32.16c, 32.18, 50.17, 52.16,
58.29a, 60.27, 60.29

Examples:  There are several expressions within the Supyire language
using the word "road".  To "straighten that road" is to follow the same
practice, or practice the same custom.  The expression "walk the road of"
means to "put something into practice."  To "go along his/her road", means
to "do what one has to do."

\co Several uses in the Supyire NT :  Matt 3:15, Matt 10:22, Matt 13:21,  Mark
4:17, Mark 12:14, Luke 7:13, Luke 12:46,  Luke 20:02 "Who’se road are you
on?", John 16:1 , Col  1:23 &  2:07 ,1 Thess 2:03, 1 Thess 3:11 Lord Jesus’
road, 1 tim 6:2.
\co God's road is also used in NT draft when discussing those who have "fallen
away", or those who are "led into sin" (Matt 13:21, Matt 24:10), also for
literal translations of God's Way (Matt 22:16).  It also is used in Matt 10:22
to express those who "endure to the end" as those who "remain on God's
road".
\co
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r sacrifice
\wrd saraga  
\co Sacrifice used in the Supyire NT.  SÃraga can refer to all sorts of offerings of
a religious nature: for example,  animals sacrificed to gods, alms, gifts at a
naming ceremony for infants which  are reciprocated by a blessing for the
child.  It includes all kinds of bloody  and non-bloody sacrifices to gods.
\co The Supyire do not sacrifice to God, at least not directly. He is seen as too
remote to intervene directly in everyday human affairs, and is not
interested in the sacrifices of men.  Therefore, these sacrifices are made to
intermediaries, i.e. fetishes, spirits.
\co Reasons for sacrifice include: to make requests for the future, to maintain
good relationships with the supernatural realm, to gain knowledge, to deal
with problems in relationships with ancestors, to ward off evil, to punish a
wrongdoer, to gain power through sorcery, to dedicate some object or place
to the spirits/fetishes.
\co The typical pattern for a sacrifice is as follows: 1. An introduction: whoever
brings the offering will let his intentions be known to the sacrificer by way of
an intermediary. The intermediary then takes the chicken or other offering
and, naming the person who has brought it, passes it on to the sacrificer,
who performs the remaining steps. 2. The offering is presented. 3. A prayer
is made for specific blessings for the offerer. 4. The throat of  the victim is
slit, and its blood is poured over the altar. As a sign that the sacrifice has
taken place, the feathers of a sacrificial chicken will be stuck to the altar
with the congealing blood. Food in a liquid form may also be poured on the
altar. However, if it is a question of a sacrifice to a fetish, the fetish itself is
dipped in the sacrificial blood, so that over the years the fetish becomes
black with thick coagulated blood. 5. After the animal or food has been
presented to the deity, it is shared around the community.
\co Within the story set, this word for "sacrifice" is used in the Elijah story
where the details of the sacrifice are not left up to the imagination.  The
details of the sacrifice are described in great length.  They gather stones,
wood, arrange the wood on the stones, and  put the sacrifice (here, once an
animal is killed for use in a sacrifice, it is called "sacrifice") on top.  Here
again, it is described in great length how the "fetish worshippers" were
worshipping a false god, while Elijah was making a sacrifice to His true
God.  In previous stories,  the word "sacrifice" would have been used in a
single sentence with the purpose of express that they were praising God. In
these previous stories, the details of the sacrifice would have been left up to
the imagination.  What exactly they were doing, why they were doing it, and
what god where they sacrificing to... these questions would have been
unanswered and possibly led to justifying their actions in this culture of
using "intermediaries" or "fetishes" in attempting to make sacrifice to God
or in attempts to gain His power. In conclusion, while the point of using the 
phrase "sacrifice" in previous stories, was a small side note in the story to
express "praise" and "thanks" to God; The story of Elijah is built around this
sacrifice event, the concept of the "sacrifice" is unpacked thoroughly, and
the point that they were making sacrifices to a false god is made clear. 
Therefore, within the story set, the word "sacrifice" is only used within the
Elijah story.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r Satan
\wrd Sitaanni?i  
\co This is the term used in the Supyire Gen & NT drafts for Satan, the enemy
of God, ruler of evil.  This name is borrowed from French. Throughout all of
our discussions, testing, and understanding Sitaannini is the chief over all
demons.  While this name is typically recognized in most places, there is
some confusion.  The name is associated with evil, and evil spiritual beings;
however, the confusion seems to lie in whether this is the "ruler" of the "evil
spirits" or whether this is another type of numerous evil spiritual beings.  In
one testing session with a UNS, they stated, "There are many of these.
Everybody knows what they are.  They do the work of evil.  They do all
work that is bad, it hurts people.  They are many and their strength is
great.  They can break the work people do.  These work opposite of God's
angels.  This is not the same as "demons".   Just like God wants us to take
his road, Satans wants us to take their road and do His will.  Satan is the
enemy of God." Another UNS stated, "This the chief of the demons."  In
speaking with the SIL team here, they stated that everybody knows this
word, but not everyone understands its meaning correctly.  The full
meaning of "Satan" would need to be explained for a correct
understanding.  Satan can best be explained in Supyire world as being
"God's enemy", or "who refuses God's will and works against God."  
"Everything that is against God is doing the work of Satan, following the
Satan road."
\co From these discussions, while the name for Satan here is recognized, its
meaning is not fully understood and should be unpacked or explained within
the story set.  Satan is first introduced in the Last Supper, Story 44, and will
be refered to as "Satan, God's enemy". The idea of Satan is built upon
further in the following Betrayal story as Satan has entered Judas and the
plot to kill Jesus develops. But Jesus states that Satan has no power over
him as he is allowing for his death to occur.  Jesus' students are seen as
having power over Satan through prayer.  Jesus also refers to this "time" as
being the time for the "owner of darkness, Satan."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r savior
\wrd Shwofoo?i  
\co Savior, or if expressed as verb "to save"
\co Is the term used in the Supyire NT draft.  It means to save, rescue,
deliver.  For example: “I will save you.”  “One day a flood was carrying a
Sanogo man away, and a soft-shelled turtle rescued that man.”  But it can
also mean to escape, be saved, or to be rescued. Another example, “He ran
home.  Didn’'t he escape that day?”  This is the term Peter uses in act.02:21.
\co But the term “Shwo”  Can also mean to buy.  In shopping for everyday items.
It can also be used to express "convincing someone of your opinion".  The
Supyire would say that you “bought their heads” or to “buy the head”  Another
meaning of this word is "to take", or "take from".  Another usage of the
word is "to protect".  If you "save someone's head" you "protect" them. 
There are multiple meanings of this word, but from our conversations with
people here, the meanings are not necessarily intertwined as we had first
thought.
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r sent
\wrd toon  
\co to send or been sent to tell somone something or to do something for
someone, a commission.  
\co In the Supyire culture, an elder is to be respected and obeyed.  Often
times, an elder will send someone younger on an errand.  That younger
person is "sent" or "commissioned" with the task.  An example of this also is
if someone in the family in the village dies, someone is "sent" to go and tell
the surrounding villages and other family members in the city the news.
That is one form of the word "commission".
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r sin
\wrd kapii  
\co evil, sin, or wrong doing, when literally broken down the word means "bad
thing" understood to mean the bad things we do against people and God,
however it can also be used to mean a disaster, unfortunate event, or
calamity.  Examples of usages for this word include the following, "You have
done something wrong to me."; "One does not repay a wrong with a
wrong"; "One persons good thing is another person's bad thing." "God does
not write down your sins." While the Supyire people do sacrifice to fetishes
and other spirits, these sacrifices are not in hopes of atoning for a sin that
they have committed against God.  This society is not a guilt-based or
sin-based society in which they quickly recognize the need for purification
from their own sin.  However, there is a strong since of community and
family and people are aware of morally right and wrong.
\co Uses in Supyire Genesis and NT draft:  Gen 39:9 - How can I do this sin
against God? , Gen 42:22 - Did I not tell you not  to sin against him? ; Matt
8:8 - if your hand or foot causes you to sin ; Matt 27:4 - I have sinned;
Mark 1:4 - forgiveness of sins )
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r Spirit
\wrd Kile Munaani  
\co "God's Spirit"
\co Is the term used in the Supyire NT to mean "Holy Spirit", but is literally
translated as "God's Spirit" or "God's Soul".  This is a concrete way of
explaining the Holy Spirit.  The term "munaani" has multiple meanings:
nose, spirit, life, soul.  It is only in the context surrounding the word, that
it's meaning is understood.  It is understood through testing that "God's
Soul" has the ability to give people power & strength
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r throne
\wrd saanra  
\co also means "kingdom", "leadership", "governing power", "rule".  The
concept here is the same as in the English language as having power, being
in charge of leadership over a country, kingdom, or place.
\co Used in Supyire draft:  Matt16:28 - until they see the Son of Man coming in
his kingdom" ; Matt 3:2 - the kingdom of heaven is at hand" ; Matt 4:23 -
proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom ; Matt 6:33 - "Seek first the kingdom
of God."  John 18:36 - "My Kingdom is not of this world."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r trust
\wrd dá , dana  
\co means to have faith, to have "confidence",  to believe in something or
someone.  It can be used to express "I believe it." or "I believe that the rain
will come."  Or "It's the things you have done that make me not trust you." 
This is used in the Supyire draft of Gen at Gen 15:6, "The Lord considered
his response of faith ..." in the Abraham story.  It is also used in the Supyire
NT for "faith" as in Mark 5:34, "Your faith has made you well."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r Why
\wrd nàhá kúrúgó ya  
\co Why? Because
\co This is the usual expression for the English "Because..."  This transitional
phrase used in explaining circumstances or situations.  It literally translates
"Why? Because..."
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r will
\wrd wuuni  
\co It is understood that this means "one's desires" or what one would like to
do.  It is "volonte" in French.  Common usages of the word include if
someone has died, to say "She is dead" can be literally translated "God's
will arrived at him/her."  Also, "Whatever the slave owner says to him, he
does.  The slave's will is not above the master's will."  Again, these
reinforce the concept that this word has similar meaning to the English word
"will".
\dt 02/Jan/2009

\r world
\wrd dinye   
\co World, planet earth, the entire place where mankind lives. For example, 
"When you die, I must watch over this world here. (said to a king by his
son)."  We have seen this used in conversation when we are talking about
the peoples from the other side of the world, or when scripture talks about
the Jesus being the world's savior in John 4:42.  THis is the same term used
in the Supyire Gen & NT drafts.
\dt 02/Jan/2009
